# AdsPrometheusConnector

## Overview
This program translates ADS variables into a Prometheus-compatible HTTP metrics endpoint. <br>
### What is ADS?
ADS is an automation protocol from Beckhoff and is used in PLCs from Beckhoff to communicate 
from the core TwinCAT function (TE1000) with extensions e.g. TF2000. 
More information can be found on the official Beckhoff [website](https://infosys.beckhoff.com/english.php?content=../content/1033/tcinfosys3/11291871243.html).
### Why is this needed?
It exposes ADS variables to Prometheus. This allows for straightforward IoT integrations.
Unlike OPC-UA, WebSocket, MQTT, database integrations, or custom HTTP servers, 
this connector does not require additional Beckhoff licenses.<br>
With this connector, it is possible to monitor ADS variables without any complex setup.

## Requirements
- Linux
- CMake (if building from source)
- [pistache](https://github.com/pistacheio/pistache) (if building from source)
- meson (if building from source)

## Features

- deterministic ADS cyclic reading of variables
- providing an HTTP endpoint for prometheus to scrape
- prometheus labels supported
- additional metrics to provide performance of the connector
- automatic grouping of variables that are built at start
- additional information endpoint that displays diagnostic information

## ⚠️ Limitations ⚠️

This is a personal project built for a my use case and is not extensively tested.

- This connector is **not designed** for **safety-critical** or **mission-critical** systems.
- **Data loss may occur** (e.g., if the application crashes or the ADS connection fails).
- **No high availability** mechanisms are implemented.
- **Not suitable** for **high-frequency** or **real-time** data acquisition.
- **No security** mechanisms are implemented. HTTP and ADS communications are **not encrypted**.
- During an online change the connector cannot detect variable changes.
  It is highly recommended to restart the connector after a download to ensure that the data is valid.
- During an upload if the timing is right, the connector cannot detect it and displays invalid data.
  It is highly recommended to restart the connector after a download to ensure that the data is valid.

It may be used in industrial environments where occasional **data loss is acceptable** and monitoring is non-critical.


## Quick Start
To use this program use the prebuilt binary or compile it yourself with cmake. <br>
To start the program, launch it and provide in the first argument the path of the configuration file. 
```bash
./AdsPrometeusConnector config.json
```

### Compile with cmake

1. Run the ADS lib install script `./install_adslib.sh`. It is important to use the provided lib, because it is modified.
2. create a build directory with `mkdir build`
3. navigate into the build folder `cd build`
4. configure cmake with `cmake ..`
5. run the build with `cmake --build . -- -j 30`

### Running as a daemon
If you are using systemd, you can install this as a daemon. I have provided a example service configuration.
1. Copy the `AdsPrometheusConnector.service` into the `/etc/systemd/system/` folder
2. Copy the binary into the `/usr/local/bin/` folder. Make sure that the binary is a executable.

3. make a configuration file under `/etc/AdsPropetheusConnector/config.json`.
Consider using the example config `textConfig.json` as a starting point.

## Configuration

```json
{
  "global": {
    "localNetId": "<NetID of this system>",
    "remoteNetId": "<NetID of SPS>",
    "remoteIp": "<IP of SPS>",
    "httpPort": 9090,
    "adsRemotePort": 851,
    "pollTimeResolution": 500
  },

  "<name of ADS symbol>": {
    "alias": "[optional] <an alternative name for the name on the prometheus endpoint>",
    "type": "[optional] <untyped|counter|gauge>",
    "description": "[optional] <a description of the metric>",
    "ADSDatatype": "<the ADS type (see all supported types bellow)>",
    "scrapingTime": 1,
    "labels": {
      "<label name>": {
        "value": "<value of the label>"
      }
    }, 
    "currentLastTime": {
          "show": true,
          "carryLabels": false,
          "alias": "<aliasName>",
          "customDescription": "<customDescription>",
          "labels": {
              "<labelName>": {
                  "value": "<value>"
              }
          }
      },
    "readTime": {
          "show": true,
          "carryLabels": false,
          "alias": "[optional] <a name that replaces the autogenerated label>",
          "customDescription": "[optional] <customDescription that replaces the autogenerated one>",
          "labels": {
              "<labelName>": {
                  "value": "<value>"
              }
          }
    },
    "lastTrySuccessful": {
      "show": true,
      "carryLabels": false,
      "alias": "[optional] <a name that replaces the autogenerated label>",
      "customDescription": "[optional] <customDescription that replaces the autogenerated one>",
      "labels": {
        "<labelName>": {
          "value": "<value>"
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

### pollTimeResolution
This specifies how often should be checked if a value has to be scraped. 
Meaning this is in the worst case the allowed deviation of the scraping time. 
The formula for min and max scraping time looks like this (where $t_s$ is the `scrapingTime` and $t_p$ is the `pollTimeResolution` ):
$$t_{min} = t_s - t_p$$
$$t_{max} = t_s + t_p$$

Please note, that when decreasing the pollResolutionTime may have a noticeable effect on CPU time, 
when the connector is not reading any ADS variable. Setting the time to 0 may cause the program to use any available CPU time. 

### adsRemotePort
This is an optional config point. It specifies the ADS port on the remote.

### Labels
Inside the `Labels` struct, a list of labels can be provided, the example above only shows one label.

### Scraping Time
The scraping time specifies how often the variable is read from ADS Server. 
The scraping time of the prometheus endpoint is specified in the config of prometheus.

### Supported ADS Datatypes

Select a appropriate datatype for your ADS Variable by the type like bool or for numeric types type and size from the list bellow.
A list of the ADS variables and size can be found [here](https://infosys.beckhoff.com/english.php?content=../content/1033/tcplccontrol/925424907.html&id=). 
Dont include the text in the braces from the `FLOAT` and `DOUBLE` these are just the size of the variable. 

#### supported config options

- BOOL
- UINT8
- UINT16
- UINT32
- UINT64
- FLOAT (32-bit)
- DOUBLE (64-bit)
- INT8
- INT16
- INT32
- INT64

#### Examples
- A `INT` is a 16-bit integer so the `INT16` is appropriate.
- A `WORD` is a 16-bit unsigned integer so use `UINT16`. 
- A `REAL` is a 32-bit floating point, so use `FLOAT`.

### Additional metrics
The large structures in the config (`currentLastTime`, `readTime`, `lastTrySuccessful` and `readTimestamp`) are additional 
prometheus metrics that may be enabled and configured. These metric show performance and status information about the
scrape of the ADS variable. 

These structures are entirely optional and if not defined, these metrics are not shown. 
All values in the structures are optional as well except for `show` this is mandatory.

#### carryLabels
The `carryLabels` option is optional and is set to true by default. 
If it is set to false, the additional metric may have its own Labels defined. 
If this is set to true, the labels section is ignored and the labels from the symbol are copied. 

### Example Config

#### Config
```json
{
  "global": {
    "localNetId": "192.168.0.10.1.1",
    "remoteNetId": "5.109.7.180.1.1",
    "remoteIp": "192.168.0.20",
    "httpPort": 9090
  },

  "MAIN.nMotorTemperature": {
    "alias": "motor_temperature",
    "type": "gauge",
    "description": "Motor temperature",
    "ADSDatatype": "DOUBLE",
    "scrapingTime": 1,
    "labels": {
      "machine": {
        "value": "A1"
      }
    }
  }
}
```
#### Output
```text
# HELP motor_temperature Motor temperature
# TYPE motor_temperature gauge
motor_temperature{machine="A1"} 42.3
```

## Configuring the PLC
For the ADS connector to work you need to add a static route to the Beckhoff PLC. 
Secure ADS is currently not supported.

### Adding a static route
A static route can be added in TcXaeShell. Here is an example config:
```text
  Name:           MyAdsClient # a name for the route
  AMS Net Id:     192.168.0.1.1.1 # NetId of your ADS client, here you can choose any valid NetID (for example use IP-Address.1.1 (the ip address of the system running the connector) e.g 192.168.0.10.1.1)
  Address:        192.168.0.1     # the IP-Address of the system running the connector
  Transport Type: TCP/IP
  Remote Route:   None / Server
  Unidirectional: false
  Secure ADS:     false
```

## Configuring prometheus
To use this endpoint edit the [config file](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/configuration/) of prometheus. 
Bellow is a minimal example:
```yaml
scrape_configs:
  - job_name: 'ads_connector'
    static_configs:
      - targets: ['localhost:9090']
```

## Additional information endpoint
The Connector provides an additional endpoint for displaying how the values are grouped. 
The endpoint is located at `/additionalInformation` and is in a json formate.

### Formate

```json
{
  "readGroups": [
    {
      "worker": "<worker>",
      "readGroup": 1,
      "scrapingTime_ms": 1000, 
      "symbols": [
        "symbol1", 
        "symbol2"
      ]
    }
  ]
}
```

#### Example

```json
{
    "readGroups": [
        {
            "readGroup": "0",
            "scrapingTime_ms": 500,
            "symbols": [
                "GrafanaExporter.nDoorState"
            ],
            "worker": "main"
        },
        {
            "readGroup": "2",
            "scrapingTime_ms": 1000,
            "symbols": [
                "NodeRed.bIsLightOn",
                "NodeRed.nLightValue_Lux"
            ],
            "worker": "main"
        },
        {
            "readGroup": "1",
            "scrapingTime_ms": 1500,
            "symbols": [
                "NodeRed.bDoNotDisturbStatus"
            ],
            "worker": "main"
        }
    ]
}
```

## Alternatives

If this connector doesn't fit the use case consider using [TwinCAT Analytics](https://www.beckhoff.com/en-en/products/automation/twincat-analytics/) or
[TwinCAT IoT Data Agent](https://www.beckhoff.com/en-en/products/automation/twincat/tfxxxx-twincat-3-functions/tf6xxx-connectivity/tf6720.html).